#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble

\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Introductory Calculus- Assignment 1 Solutions)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (This is a set of solutions for sections 1.5, 1.6, 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 in Stewart: calculus.)
            /Keywords   (exponentials, tangents, Stewart, Solutions, limits, Acadia)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}

\usepackage{lastpage}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Acadia University 
\newline 

\latex latex 

\backslash 
href{http://ace.acadiau.ca/math/}{Department of Mathematics and Statistics}
\latex default 

\newline 

\latex latex 
 
\backslash 
vspace*{3mm}
\latex default 
 
\series bold 
INTRODUCTORY CALCULUS 1
\series default 

\newline 
 (MATH 1013) 
\newline 

\latex latex 
 
\backslash 
vspace*{3mm}
\latex default 
 Some extra problems for limits, continuity and derivatives
\layout Author


\latex latex 

\backslash 
href{http://ondelette.com/acadia/}{Daniel Lemire}
\latex default 
, Ph.D.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
\color blue
Warning:
\series default 
\color default
 These are extra problems to do in preparation of your first test.
 Solutions to these problems 
\series bold 
\color red
will not be
\series default 
\color default
 provided.
 The purpose of these problems is to allow you to check that you understand
 the material.
 Some of these problems are very difficult and not meant to be representative
 of what you'll find in tests.
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Logarithms}}{Logarithms}
\layout Enumerate

Some of you have difficulties working with logarithms and exponentials.
 Unfortunately, it is an essential skill in science, mathematics and engineering
 (yes, even in biology, medecine, computer science and geology...!).
 Here are some expressions that you need to simplify.
 Sure you can use Maple, but you should use Maple only to check your answers!
 Also, be careful since Maple might not get the best answer!
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( a^{b}\ln \left( ^{a}\sqrt{c}\right)  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \log _{4}64 \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( e^{\log _{\beta }\alpha }-\beta ^{\log _{\beta }\alpha \log _{\beta }e} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \log \frac{b}{a}-\log b \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

In computer science, we say that two algorithms have the same complexity
 if 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(n)=Cg(n)+D \)
\end_inset 

 for all positive 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 integers where 
\begin_inset Formula \( C \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( D \)
\end_inset 

 are some constanst and 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( g \)
\end_inset 

 are the time an algorithm takes to process 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 units of information (I'm cutting corners here...).
 Prove that the following pairs of 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( g \)
\end_inset 

 have the same complexity (that is, 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(n)=Cg(n)+D \)
\end_inset 

 for some constants 
\begin_inset Formula \( C \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( D \)
\end_inset 

).
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \log n \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \ln n \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \log 2n \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \log n \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Continuity}}{Continuity}
\layout Enumerate

Let 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 be the function defined by
\begin_inset Formula \[
f(t)=\left\{ \begin{array}{cc}
t+2 & \textrm{if }t\leq -10\\
t^{2} & \textrm{if  }-10<t\leq 5\\
e^{2\log _{2}t} & \textrm{if }5<t\leq 10\\
\ln (t+e) & \textrm{if }t>10
\end{array}\right. \]

\end_inset 

You should sketch this function, and tell where the function is continuous,
 where the function is discontinuous and be able to justify fully your answers.
 You should be able to sketch 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 without a plotting calculator and to simplify the definition where possible.
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Derivatives}}{Derivatives}
\layout Enumerate

An astronomer studying some new gaz nebula finds out that the mass of the
 nebula is increasing.
 Based on his observations and some curve fitting, it would seem like the
 nebula mass is given by 
\begin_inset Formula \( M(t)=100\frac{t-1}{t^{2}+1}+200 \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( t \)
\end_inset 

 is in years (assuming 2000 is year 0) and the mass is expressed as a fraction
 of the mass of the Sun (so that 
\begin_inset Formula \( 100 \)
\end_inset 

 means 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 


\begin_inset Formula \( 100 \)
\end_inset 

 times the mass of the Sun
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

).
 As the astronomer's assistant, answer the following questions (without
 using Maple at first!):
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

What is 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }M(t) \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

When is 
\begin_inset Formula \( M(t) \)
\end_inset 

 ever negative?
\layout Enumerate

What is 
\begin_inset Formula \( M'(t) \)
\end_inset 

, what are the units and what does it mean? Solve for 
\begin_inset Formula \( M'(t)=0 \)
\end_inset 

.
 You have to use the definition of the derivative to solve for 
\begin_inset Formula \( M' \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Enumerate

What is 
\begin_inset Formula \( M''(t), \)
\end_inset 

 what are the units and what does it mean?
\layout Enumerate

Solve for 
\begin_inset Formula \( M \)
\end_inset 

 as a function of 
\begin_inset Formula \( t \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Enumerate

Using the previous result, express 
\begin_inset Formula \( v=M'(t) \)
\end_inset 

 as a function of the mass (
\begin_inset Formula \( v(M) \)
\end_inset 

).
 What are the units?
\layout Enumerate

Solve for 
\begin_inset Formula \( v'(M) \)
\end_inset 

 and describe the meaning (what are the units?).
\end_deeper 
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem [Stewart]{Steward}

James Stewart, 
\shape italic 
Calculus: Concepts and Contexts
\shape default 
 (Second Edition), Brooks/Cole, 2001.
\the_end
