#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true,citecolor=blue]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Topics from Advanced Calculus)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (Example 1.)
            /Keywords   ( vector calculus, Acadia)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language french
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Math1013-special 
\newline 
Acadia University
\newline 
This is a special exam.
 No documentation is allowed.
 
\newline 
You have 3 hours.
\layout Author

Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.
\layout Enumerate

Derivatives
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Find the derivatives of the following functions.
 DO NOT SIMPLIFY anymore than necessary.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=\frac{x^{2}+\sqrt{x}}{x^{4}-e^{x}} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{3cm}
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( h(x)=x^{\sin x^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{3cm}
\latex default 

\newline 

\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( r(x)=\sec ^{2}\left( 3x+5\right)  \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\latex default 

\newline 

\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( g(t)=t^{\ln (t)} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\latex default 

\newline 

\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Given 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sqrt{x}+\sqrt{y}=xy+1 \)
\end_inset 

 find
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{dy}{dx} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{3cm}
\latex default 

\newline 

\layout Enumerate

[5 marks] The equation of the tangent to the curve at the point 
\begin_inset Formula \( (1,1) \)
\end_inset 

.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{3cm}
\end_deeper 
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Limits.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Calculate the following limits or explain why they don't exist.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{(h+1)^{2}-1}{h} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }x^{3}e^{-x^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow 2}\frac{x-2}{x^{2}-4x+4} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }\left( 1+\frac{2}{x}\right) ^{x} \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] If 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1\leq f(x)\leq (x-1)^{2}+1 \)
\end_inset 

 for all 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

, find 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow -1}f(x) \)
\end_inset 

.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\layout Enumerate

IVT
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[2 marks] State the Intermediate Value Theorem.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\layout Enumerate

[3 marks] Given the function 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
2t+1\, 0\leq t\leq 3\\
t^{2}\, 3<t\leq 5
\end{array}\right.  \)
\end_inset 

defined on the interval 
\begin_inset Formula \( [0,5] \)
\end_inset 

.
 Note that 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(0)=1 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(5)=25 \)
\end_inset 

 but 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x) \)
\end_inset 

 is never equal to 
\begin_inset Formula \( 8 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Explain why this doesn't contradict IVT.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{4cm}
\latex default 

\newline 

\end_deeper 
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Extrema/Optimization
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[5 marks] State the Extreme Value Theorem
\latex latex 
.
\backslash 
vspace*{3cm}
\layout Enumerate

[20 marks] Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum of 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=e^{x^{3}-x} \)
\end_inset 

 on the interval 
\begin_inset Formula \( [-1,0] \)
\end_inset 

.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{5cm}
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Applications of the derivative
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[15 marks] Use Newton's method with an initial guess of 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{0}=1 \)
\end_inset 

 to find where 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=x^{3}-3 \)
\end_inset 

 has a zero.
 Calculate the value correct to two decimal places, assuming that each step
 brings you closer to the correct answer.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{5cm}
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Use a local linear approximation to 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=x^{1/3} \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=3.375 \)
\end_inset 

 to approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{3}\sqrt{3} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Note that 
\begin_inset Formula \( (3.375)^{1/3}=1.5 \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace*{3cm}
\the_end
