#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language french
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Tom's draft 
\layout Author

Daniel Lemire
\layout Enumerate

Derivatives
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Find the derivatives of the following functions.
 DO NOT SIMPLIFY anymore than necessary.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=\frac{x^{2}+\sqrt{x}}{x^{4}-e^{x}} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: seems like a lot of messy algebra???
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( h(x)=x^{\sin x^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: Log.
 diff.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( x^{\sin (x^{2})}\left( \frac{\sin x^{2}}{x}+x\ln \left( x^{2}\right) \cos \left( x^{2}\right) \right)  \)
\end_inset 

.
 A bit on the hard side, but doable.
 There is the problem of 
\begin_inset Formula \( x<0 \)
\end_inset 

 with log???
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( r(x)=\sec ^{2}\left( 3x+5\right)  \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: 
\begin_inset Formula \( 6\sec ^{2}(3x+5)\tan (3x+5) \)
\end_inset 

.
 Fair if you know what the der.
 of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sec  \)
\end_inset 

 is.
 I spent very little time on this in class.
 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( g(t)=t^{\ln (t)} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2^{t^{\ln t-1}}\ln t \)
\end_inset 

 log.
 diff.
 (easy?)
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Given 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sqrt{x}+\sqrt{y}=xy+1 \)
\end_inset 

 find
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{dy}{dx} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: (in terms of 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( y \)
\end_inset 

 ?)
\layout Enumerate

The equation of the tangent to the curve at the point 
\begin_inset Formula \( (1,1) \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
Answer: quite fair since you give both 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( y \)
\end_inset 

.
\end_deeper 
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Limits.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Calculate the following limits or explain why they don't exist.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{(h+1)^{2}-1}{h} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: 2 (easy, basic).
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }x^{3}e^{-x^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: clearly 0...
 Hospital?
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow 2}\frac{x-2}{x^{2}-4x+4} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: doesn't exist...
 hard?
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow \infty }\left( 1+\frac{2}{x}\right) ^{x} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 
Answer: 
\begin_inset Formula \( e^{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Standard log-limit.
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

If 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1\leq f(x)\leq x^{2}+2x+2 \)
\end_inset 

 for all 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

, find 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{x\rightarrow -1}f(x) \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
Answer: 1.
 Isn't it a bit easy????
\layout Enumerate

IVT
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

State IVT
\newline 
Answer: Fair.
\layout Enumerate

Given the function 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=\left\{ \begin{array}{c}
2t+1\, 0\leq t\leq 3\\
t^{2}\, 3<t\leq 5
\end{array}\right.  \)
\end_inset 

defined on the interval 
\begin_inset Formula \( [0,5] \)
\end_inset 

.
 Note that 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(0)=1 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(5)=25 \)
\end_inset 

 but 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x) \)
\end_inset 

 is never equal to 
\begin_inset Formula \( 8 \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
Answer: is there a question?
\end_deeper 
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Extrema/Optimization
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

State the Extreme Value Theorem
\newline 
Answer: ok
\layout Enumerate

Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum of 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=e^{x^{3}-x} \)
\end_inset 

 on the interval 
\begin_inset Formula \( [-1,0] \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
Answer: 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'(x)=(3x^{2}-1)e^{x^{3}-x} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'(x)=0 \)
\end_inset 

 implies 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=\pm 1/\sqrt{3} \)
\end_inset 

, so by CIM, we have to choose among the values 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(0)=1 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(-1)=1, \)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \( e^{-1/3\sqrt{3}+1/\sqrt{3}}>1 \)
\end_inset 

 .
 Ok, fair question (should give plot though!).
\layout Enumerate

A piece of paper 
\begin_inset Formula \( 16\, cm \)
\end_inset 

 by 
\begin_inset Formula \( 24\, cm \)
\end_inset 

 is folded (see sketch) how (...)
\newline 
Answer: I'm not sure I understand...
 
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

I can't reproduce the graph very easily but it seems like a fair question.
\layout Enumerate

Applications of the derivative
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Use Newton's method with an initial guess of 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{0}=1 \)
\end_inset 

 to find where 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=x^{3}-3 \)
\end_inset 

 has a zero.
 Calculate the value correct to two decimal places, assuming that each step
 brings you closer to the correct answer.
\newline 
Answer: I'm not sure the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

assuming that each step(...)
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 helps them.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{1}=1-\frac{-2}{3}=5/3 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{2}\cong 1.47 \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Enumerate

Use a local linear approximation to 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=x^{1/3} \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=3.375 \)
\end_inset 

 to approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( ^{3}\sqrt{3} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Note that 
\begin_inset Formula \( (3.375)^{1/3}=1.5 \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\newline 
Answer: 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(3)=f(3.375)-0.375f'(3.375) \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'(x)=x^{-2/3}/3 \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'(3.375)=\frac{1}{3(1.5)^{2}}=0.\overline{148} \)
\end_inset 

 .
 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(3)=1.5-0.375(0.\overline{148}) \)
\end_inset 

 (and so on...)
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Quotes fld
\end_inset 

survivor in Nova Scotia
\begin_inset Quotes frd
\end_inset 

...
 I'm missing a few things...
\the_end
