#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass letter
\begin_preamble
\usepackage[pdftex]{hyperref}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
 \pdfadjustspacing=1
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout My Address

Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.
\newline 
Department of Math.
 and Stat.
\newline 
Acadia University
\newline 
Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada
\newline 
B0P 1X0
\layout Send To Address

Professor Akram Aldroubi
\newline 
Associate Editor, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging
\newline 
Department of Mathematics
\newline 
Vanderbilt University
\newline 
Nashville TN 37240
\newline 
Fax: (615) 322-6656
\newline 
adroubi@math.vanderbilt.edu
\layout Signature

Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.
 (lemire@ondelette.com) 
\newline 
Department of Math.
 and Stat.
\newline 
Acadia University, Nova Scotia, Canada
\layout Opening

Dear Dr.
 Aldrouki
\layout Standard

In December, I agree to review the paper IEEE TMI #248-01 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Using of wavelets for smoothing and denoising of gated blood pool images
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 for a special issue on 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Wavelets in Medical Imaging
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 for IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging.
 You will find my review of this paper with this letter.
 I made sure to proceed in a timely fashion.
 
\layout Standard

Please don't hesitate to get in touch with me if I can be of further assistance.
\layout Closing

Yours sincerely,
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\latex default 
 
\layout Standard
\align center 

\series bold 
Criticism
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Abstract.

\series default 
 This paper attempts to denoise short sequences of images (16 images) while
 each one of these images is relatively small (
\begin_inset Formula \( 64\times 64 \)
\end_inset 

 pixels).
 This information is left out from the abstract even though it seems absolutely
 necessary to understand the problem at hand.
 In fact, the size of each image is only mentionned at the end of the introducti
on.
 Indeed, as far as wavelet processing is concerned, such small images are
 a somewhat special case.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Missing data.

\series default 
 We do not know how many bits per pixel the images have (
\begin_inset Formula \( 4,8,12,16? \)
\end_inset 

) and it doesn't seem to be mentionned anywhere in the article.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Motivation.

\series default 
 While the authors do a good job in explaining to the reader why these images
 are somewhat noisy, as are almost all medical images, they may fail to
 convince that denoising these images is required or helpful for clinical
 applications.
 While they show that their denoising can be done in such a way as to avoid
 destroying vital information, it is unclear what the purpose of this denoising
 is.
 The authors do not refer to any work showing that this noise is a problem
 clinically and therefore, it is quite natural to ask whether a doctor would
 want to look at the denoised images when the original images are available.
 A possible application might be automated processing of these images, however
 the authors do not suggest such work.
 Overall, the authors give no evidence that this denoising could make these
 images easier to process either by a human or by a machine.
 Surely, compression of the data doesn't seem to be an issue in this case.
 If denoising these images is a significant work, we would also expect earlier
 work on the same topic or at least some explanation as to why this is the
 first attempt ever at denoising these images.
 More broadly, it is unclear what scientific value there could be in denoising
 such small images except that they propose an alternative to the 2D transform.
 However, they do not attempt to explain why their 1D processing of images
 would be better in a general setting and therefore, it is unclear whether
 their approach could be applicable to other fields or interesting at all
 for other researchers working on different images.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Applicability of the wavelet transform.

\series default 
 The authors fail to mention the problems expected when processing very
 short signals using a multiscale approach.
 Indeed, not only does it fail in these specific instances, but the wavelet
 transform over 
\begin_inset Formula \( 16 \)
\end_inset 

 samples is rarely going to be a valid tool.
 Moreover, when filtering such a small image, surely, the boundaries pose
 a problem.
 How are the boundaries processed when the convolution is applied? A mirror-like
 approach or some zero padding or yet something finer? This is very likely
 to make a substantial difference in the results.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
newpage
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Reproducibility of the algorithms.

\series default 
 Moreover, the paper fails to detail many important algorithms it is proposing,
 making it impossible for the reader to reproduce the results given a similar
 set of images.
 For example, the authors write that they use 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

the classical method of wavelet denoising
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 This reviewer assumes that they are referring to one of the algorithms
 proposed by Donoho and al.
 It should be pointed out that there exists more than one classical method
 for wavelet denoising (hard and soft denoising for example).
 The authors compare a 1D scheme with a 2D scheme both using a variation
 of this classical method without giving the necessary details to the reader.
 To be precise, we don't even know if the same method was really applied
 in both cases as there is no explicit mention of wavelet-denoising in the
 1D case.
 In fact, we know for a fact that the 1D denoising scheme is preceded by
 a perpendical low-pass filter whereas the 2D denoising scheme isn't.
 We don't know how they handle some of the common problems such as values
 exceeding the intensity bounds (negative pixel values for example).

\latex latex 
 
\latex default 
The authors then describe the wavelets they have been using: Daubechies,
 Symlet, Coiflet, Biorthogonal, Reverse Biorthogonal.
 (Surprisingly, the Haar transform isn't mentioned here.) Again, this description
 is somewhat unclear.
 While we can see that the figures were generated using 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Daubechies family, order 2, level 2
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, it is unclear what the authors did with the other wavelet filters.
 It should also be pointed out that there are many biorthogonal wavelets.
 We can assume here that they are referring to Cohen-Daubechies-Feauveau
 wavelets, but it should be clearly stated and the term 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Reverse Biorthogonal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 should be clearly defined with the respective number of null moments spelled
 out.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Unsustained claim.

\series default 
 The authors conclude that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

The great number of wavelet families is one of the reasons for the high
 suitability of this technique (...)
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 whereas the paper doesn't support this statement at all as the various
 wavelet filters are never compared explicitely.
 
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Arbitrary number of scales.

\series default 
 We can also wonder whether it is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

fair
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 to compare a 1D transform using 2 iterations over 
\begin_inset Formula \( 4096 \)
\end_inset 

 samples with a 2D transform using again 2 iterations but with 
\begin_inset Formula \( N=64 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Surely, the authors could have iterated more than twice over 
\begin_inset Formula \( 4096 \)
\end_inset 

 samples and therefore, and their comment to the effect that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

(...) 1D wavelets modified middle and low frequencies less than 2D wavelet
 spatial smoothing(...)
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 might be related to this choice they made.
 They should explain why they chose to do only two iterations while they
 could have used many more.
 It is not clear what would have happened if they had processed 4 or 5 scales
 in their 1D denoising scheme.
 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
newpage
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Choice of algorithms.

\series default 
 Surely, one could design a denoising scheme using 2D wavelets that hardly
 change the data whereas one could design an overly aggressive 1D scheme.
 Is their 1D scheme better than all 2D schemes or only the one they've chosen?
 To the reader, this seems like a very important question.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Question about perpendicular low-pass filter.

\series default 
 We face difficulties yet in comparing the 1D scheme with the 2D scheme
 since the authors seem to apply a low-pass filter on their data before
 the wavelet transform.
 The filter (1/2,1,1/2) seems to be applied in a perpendicular fashion to
 the transform.
 It is suspicious that the filter isn't normalized so that the sum of the
 terms be one.
 This is especially important since the authors use the intensity of the
 resulting images as a measure of quality.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
What is intensity?
\series default 
 We should point out that wavelet denoising schemes typically only modify
 the wavelet coefficients and hence, the denoised signal has the same mass
 (average) as the original signal.
 For example, given the data 
\begin_inset Formula \( \{2,3\} \)
\end_inset 

 an aggressive Haar-based denoising might output 
\begin_inset Formula \( \{2.5,2.5\} \)
\end_inset 

.
 It is therefore difficult to understand how the mean intensity of the denoised
 images could be strictly smaller (Fig.
 4) than the original images.
 Chances are that the intensity is measured in terms of RMS or another such
 algorithm but this isn't clear in the paper.
 Also, it isn't clear how intensity could be a measure of quality (contrast
 maybe, but intensity?).
 Overall, the authors shouldn't provide evidence that intensity is lower
 after denoising without explaining that fact in mathematical terms.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Meaning of the indicators.

\series default 
 All of the indicator provided seem to measure how close the denoised image
 is to the original image except for the analysis of the gradient.
 While denoising images without changing much their content (intensity,
 visual analysis, Fourier analysis, TAC) is easy, actually achieving some
 better properties (like better contour in an analysis of the gradients)
 should be the actual goal.
 This is not clear in the paper.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Unsustained claim.

\series default 
 The authors claim that their 1D method is ready to be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

used in routine nuclear cardiology practice
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.

\latex latex 
 
\latex default 
Is this claim founded? 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
newpage
\layout Standard
\align center 

\series bold 
Some specific revisions needed
\layout Enumerate

The title and the first sentence of the abstract could be shorter.
\layout Enumerate

The second paragraph of the introduction has only one sentence and is followed
 by an enumeration of problems, each in its own paragraph.
 The authors should avoid a paragraph with a single sentence.
\layout Enumerate

The authors fail to mention in the abstract the size of the images (
\begin_inset Formula \( 64\times 64 \)
\end_inset 

 pixels).
 This very specific information is absolutely necessary to make sense of
 the abstract.
\layout Enumerate

The typesetting of the document is lacking.
\the_end
