#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass amsart
\begin_preamble
\usepackage {graphicx}


\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}

 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true,citecolor=blue,linkcolor=webblackblue]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Mathematics 2023 - Infinite Series I)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire)
            /Subject    (A document on series for the course topics from advanced calculs offered at Acadia University.)
            /Keywords   ( series, convergence, Taylor, ratio test, cauchy sequences)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle fancy

\layout Title

Mathematics 2023 - Infinite Series I (Examples)
\newline 
Acadia University
\layout Address

Copyright 2002 D.
 Lemire
\layout Section

Questions
\layout Exercise

Compute the Taylor expansion of 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1/x \)
\end_inset 

 about 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Find the radius of convergence.
 Using Taylor Theorem, find a bound on 
\begin_inset Formula \( |1/x-S_{2}(x)| \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( S_{2} \)
\end_inset 

 is the sum of the first two terms over the interval 
\begin_inset Formula \( [1,2) \)
\end_inset 

.
 Can you bound the error over 
\begin_inset Formula \( [1,2) \)
\end_inset 

 using another theorem? What result do you get?
\layout Standard

\SpecialChar ~

\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{3cm}
\layout Exercise

Will 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sum _{k=0}^{\infty }\frac{e^{k}}{k!} \)
\end_inset 

 converge???
\layout Standard

\SpecialChar ~

\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{3cm}
\layout Exercise

Will 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sum _{k=0}^{\infty }\frac{k!}{(2k)!} \)
\end_inset 

 converge???
\layout Standard

\SpecialChar ~

\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{3cm}
\layout Exercise

Will 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sum _{k=2}^{\infty }\frac{(-1)^{k}}{\ln k} \)
\end_inset 

 converge?
\latex latex 

\backslash 
newpage
\layout Section

Solutions
\layout Example*


\begin_inset Formula \( 1/x=1-(x-1)+(x-1)^{2}-(x-1)^{3}+... \)
\end_inset 

.
 The ratio test gives us 
\begin_inset Formula \( R=|x-1| \)
\end_inset 

 and thus the ratio of convergence is 1.
 Taylor Theorem bounds the error after two terms by 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{\frac{2}{\xi }(x-1)^{2}}{2}=\frac{(x-1)^{2}}{\xi }<\frac{(1)^{2}}{1}=1 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Using AST, we check that this is an alternating series (assuming 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1>(x-1)>0 \)
\end_inset 

 makes this easy), hence the error after two terms is given by 
\begin_inset Formula \( (x-1)^{2}<1 \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

\SpecialChar ~

\layout Example*

We apply the ratio test, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{e^{k+1}}{(k+1)!}\frac{k!}{e^{k}}=\frac{e}{k+1} \)
\end_inset 

 which goes to zero when 
\begin_inset Formula \( k \)
\end_inset 

 becomes big.
\layout Standard

\SpecialChar ~

\layout Example*

Again, we apply the ratio test, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{(k+1)!}{(2k+2)!}\frac{(2k)!}{k!}=\frac{k+1}{(2k+2)(2k+1)} \)
\end_inset 

 which clearly goes to zero as 
\begin_inset Formula \( k \)
\end_inset 

 becomes big.
\layout Standard

\SpecialChar ~

\layout Example*

Applying the ratio test, we get 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{\ln k}{\ln (k+1)} \)
\end_inset 

 which tends to 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1 \)
\end_inset 

 as 
\begin_inset Formula \( k \)
\end_inset 

 becomes big (just use l'Hospital rule!) However, since 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{1}{\ln (k+1)}<\frac{1}{\ln k} \)
\end_inset 

 (
\begin_inset Formula \( \ln  \)
\end_inset 

 is monotone increasing!) the series is alternating and thus, it converges!
\the_end
