#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Math2023 - course outline)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject (This is a course outline for Math 2023 including the grading scheme and a rough schedule.)
            /Keywords   (series, differential equations, vector calculus, Acadia)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

MATH 2023 - Topics from Advanced Calculus
\newline 
Acadia University
\layout Author

Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.
 
\layout Date

Winter 2002
\layout Address

Email: 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
href{mailto:daniel.lemire@acadiau.ca}{daniel.lemire@acadiau.ca}
\layout Address

Web: 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
href{http://www.ondelette.com/acadia/}{http://www.ondelette.com/acadia/}
\layout Address

Office hours: MWF 10:30-12:30 
\layout Address

Office: HSH117
\layout Section


\series medium 
Summary
\layout Standard

Vector functions and their derivatives.
 Line integrals, Infinite series.
 Differential equations: first and second-order linear equations and application
; series solutions.
\layout Section


\series medium 
Prerequisite
\layout Standard

Math 2013 is required.
\layout Section


\series medium 
Textbooks
\layout Standard

Required:
\layout Itemize

McCallum, Hughes-Hallett, and Gleason, 
\shape italic 
Multivariable Calculus
\shape default 
, Wiley, ISBN #0471311510.
 
\layout Itemize

Bronson, 
\shape italic 
Schaum's Outline of Differential Equations
\shape default 
, Schaum, 1994, McGraw-Hill.
 ISBN #0070080194.
\layout Standard

Suggested:
\layout Itemize

Harry M.
 Schey, 
\shape italic 
Div, Grad, Curl, and all that
\shape default 
, W.
 W.
 Horton & Cie, August 1997.
 ISBN #0393969975.
\layout Standard

Some free lecture notes will be made available to the students based on
 the following document:
\layout Itemize


\shape italic 
Mathematics 2023 - Infinite Series I
\shape default 
 © 1998 F.
 Chipman, Acadia University 
\newline 
Revised 1999 T.
 Archibald, Acadia University.
\layout Section


\series medium 
Course outline
\layout Enumerate

Vector Functions and Their Derivatives
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

Line integrals 
\layout Itemize

Grad, Curl 
\layout Itemize

Green's theorem, Stoke's theorem
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Series
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

Convergence 
\layout Itemize

Bounded series 
\layout Itemize

Taylor series 
\layout Itemize

Radius of convergence
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Differential Equations
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

Linear Differential Equations 
\layout Itemize

Second-Order Linear Differential Equations 
\layout Itemize

The Method of Undetermined Coefficients 
\layout Itemize

Variation of Parameters 
\layout Itemize

Initial-Value Problems 
\layout Itemize

Series Solutions 
\layout Itemize

Eigenfunction Expansions
\end_deeper 
\layout Standard

This course is a mix of three topics.
 We will first learn about 
\shape italic 
Grad, Curl and all that
\shape default 
, in other words, Vector calculus during the first weeks of the course.
 We will then learn more about series and their convergence.
 It should take us roughly to study week at which point we will be ready
 for the mid-term exam right after study week.
 The rest of the course will be on differential equations and we will use
 some of our knowledge of series to solve some of the more complicated different
ial equations.
 Correspondingly, you should expect 4 assignments, the first one on vector
 calculus, the second one on series and the last two assignments on differential
 equations.
 Maple might be used for this course.
\layout Section

Grading Scheme 
\layout Standard

There are two marking schemes.
 The second one is meant to help students who would do poorly on the Mid-Term
 and the assignments.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="2" rows="4" columns="3">
<features rotate="false" islongtable="false" endhead="0" endfirsthead="0" endfoot="0" endlastfoot="0">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="false" width="" special="">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="false" width="" special="">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="" special="">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Best of two schemes
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Scheme 1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Scheme 2
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4 Assignments
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0%
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mid-Term Exam
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0%
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Final Exam
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

60%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

100%
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Section

Assignments
\layout Standard

Assignments will be made of a large set of problems and students will have
 roughly two weeks to complete each set.
 Team work will be allowed but each student must write his own paper.
 These problems will be similar to what you can expect during the exams
 so students are encouraged to work the problems on their own whenever possible.
 
\the_end
