#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
%%%%%
%%%%%
%%%%%
%% Welcome!
%% if you have any question about this
%% document, please get in touch with
%% Daniel Lemire at lemire@ondelette.com
%%
%% Of course, this file was generated
%% with LyX which means that the syntax
%% might be weird at times, but I've found
%% that LyX did an excellent job overall at
%% generating clean LaTeX syntax.
%% Why do I choose LyX? Because LyX
%% doesn't come with its own LaTeX engine.
%% LyX simply use whatever tex I have.
%% There is no "proprietary gizmos" going
%% on. Also, instead of waiting for support
%% from some folk in California, I can find
%% most of the answers I need on the web,
%% for free! Oh! And LyX is free too! 
%% Good old Open Source software!
%%
%% (Sorry for the propaganda!)
%% 
%% Thanks!
%% Enjoy!
%%
%% Sept. 8th 2001
%% Grand-Pré, NS
%%
%%%%%%%%%%
%
% Notice that this document requires quite
% a bit of macros... 
% Sorry about that!
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true,citecolor=blue]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Topics from Advanced Calculus)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (MidTerm.)
            /Keywords   ( vector calculus, Acadia)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}


%%
%% You might need this next line... I don't for
%% some reason... defined somewhere?
%%
%% \newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
%%
%% Document should begin NOW!
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
\lang english

\backslash 
makeatother
\newline 

\backslash 
thispagestyle{empty}
\latex default 
\lang american
Advanced Calculus (MATH 2023) - MidTerm
\newline 
February 27th 2002
\newline 

\latex latex 
\lang english

\backslash 
mbox{}
\latex default 
 
\hfill 
NAME: 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2in}{.1mm}
\latex default 

\newline 

\latex latex 

\backslash 
mbox{}
\latex default 
 
\hfill 
Please Print 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
hspace{1in}
\latex default 

\newline 

\layout Standard


\latex latex 
\lang english

\backslash 
mbox{}
\latex default 
 
\hfill 
Id.
 No.: 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
rule{2in}{.1mm}
\layout Standard

Note: You are allowed to one sheet (both sides) with handwritten notes and
 a calculator.
 You have 50 minutes to write the test.
\layout Enumerate

A vector field is given by 
\begin_inset Formula \( \vec{F}(x,y,z)=x^{2}y\vec{i}+\left( \frac{x^{3}}{3}+x\right) \vec{j}+\vec{k} \)
\end_inset 

 .
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Compute 
\begin_inset Formula \( \bigtriangledown \cdot \vec{F} \)
\end_inset 

 (the divergence).
 Show your work.
\newline 
Answer:
\begin_inset Formula \( \bigtriangledown \cdot \vec{F}=2xy \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Compute 
\begin_inset Formula \( \bigtriangledown \times \vec{F} \)
\end_inset 

 (the curl).
 Show your work.
\newline 
Answer:
\begin_inset Formula \( \bigtriangledown \times \vec{F}=\vec{k} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

[20 marks] Compute the line integral 
\begin_inset Formula \( \oint _{C}\vec{F}\cdot d\vec{r} \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( C \)
\end_inset 

 is the unit circle centered at 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0 \)
\end_inset 

 on the plane (
\begin_inset Formula \( x^{2}+y^{2}=1 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( z=0 \)
\end_inset 

) using Stoke's theorem.
 State any assumption you make in integrating.
\newline 
Answer: 
\begin_inset Formula \( \oint _{C}\vec{F}\cdot d\vec{r}=\int _{C}\bigtriangledown \times \vec{F}dA=\int _{C}dA=\pi  \)
\end_inset 

 assuming counter-clockwise integration.
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Series and sequences
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Give an example of a monotone sequence that does not converge.
\newline 
Answer: 1,2,3,4...
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Does the series 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sum _{k=1}^{\infty }\frac{e^{k}}{\left( k^{2}\right) !} \)
\end_inset 

converges? Does it converge absolutely? Prove your result.
\newline 
Answer: Since 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lim _{k\rightarrow \infty }\left| \frac{e^{k+1}}{(k+1)^{2}!}\frac{k^{2}!}{e^{k}}\right| =\lim _{k\rightarrow \infty }\left| \frac{e}{(k+1)^{2}...(k^{2}+1)}\right| =0 \)
\end_inset 

 it converges by the ratio test.
 Since we used the ratio test, it must converge absolutely.
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Show that the series 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sum _{k=1}^{\infty }\frac{(-1)^{2}}{\sqrt{k}} \)
\end_inset 

converges.
\newline 
Answer: It is an alternating series.
 By AST it must converge since 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1/\sqrt{k} \)
\end_inset 

 decreases.
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] A convergent series is absolutely convergent.
 Prove or give a counter-example.
\newline 
Answer: Counter-example 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1,-1/2,1/3,-1/4,... \)
\end_inset 

 is 
\begin_inset Formula \( \ln 2 \)
\end_inset 

 whereas 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1,1/2,1/3,1/4,... \)
\end_inset 

 doesn't converge.
\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Let 
\begin_inset Formula \( S_{n}=\sum _{k=1}^{n}\frac{(-1)^{2}}{\sqrt{k}} \)
\end_inset 

and 
\begin_inset Formula \( L=\sum _{k=1}^{\infty }\frac{(-1)^{2}}{\sqrt{k}} \)
\end_inset 

, find 
\begin_inset Formula \( N \)
\end_inset 

 such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left| S_{N}-L\right| <\frac{1}{3} \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
Answer: Since it is an alternating series, we have 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left| S_{N}-L\right| <\frac{1}{\sqrt{N+1}} \)
\end_inset 

 and hence 
\begin_inset Formula \( N=8 \)
\end_inset 

 is a good choice.
\the_end
