#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Standard

Question 1.
 (First-Order Differential Equations) The equation governing for the current
 (
\begin_inset Formula \( I \)
\end_inset 

) going through a simple RL circuit with electromotive force 
\begin_inset Formula \( E \)
\end_inset 

 is given by 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{dI}{dt}+\frac{R}{L}I=\frac{E}{L} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Suppose that the electromotive force is given by 
\begin_inset Formula \( E(t)=\cos mt \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( m \)
\end_inset 

 is non-zero.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( R \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( L \)
\end_inset 

 are unknown non-zero parameters.
 
\newline 
(a) True of False, this differential equation is linear?
\newline 
(b) State the corresponding homogeneous differential equation.
\newline 
(c) How many linearily independent solutions must the corresponding homogeneous
 problem have?
\newline 
(d) Find all such solutions.
 
\newline 
(e) Show that your solutions are linearily independent.
\newline 
(f) Give the general solution to 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{dI}{dt}+\frac{R}{L}I=\frac{E}{L} \)
\end_inset 

 with 
\begin_inset Formula \( E(t)=\cos mt \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
(g) Solve the differential equation with the initial condition 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(0)=0 \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

Solution: The solution to the homogeneous problem is 
\begin_inset Formula \( e^{-Rt/L} \)
\end_inset 

 whereas the solution to the inhomogeneous problem is 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\sin mt+B\cos mt \)
\end_inset 

, after substitution, we get 
\begin_inset Formula \[
Am\cos mt-Bm\sin mt+\frac{AR}{L}\sin mt+\frac{RB}{L}\cos mt=\frac{\cos mt}{L}\]

\end_inset 

hence 
\begin_inset Formula \( Am+RB/L=1/L \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( AR/L=Bm \)
\end_inset 

.
 We can easily solve this system of equations to get 
\begin_inset Formula \( A=\frac{Lm}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( B=\frac{R}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}} \)
\end_inset 

.
 We get 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(t)=\frac{Lm}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}}\sin mt+\frac{R}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}}\cos mt+c_{1}e^{-Rt/L} \)
\end_inset 

 to get 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(0)=0 \)
\end_inset 

, we need 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(0)=\frac{R}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}}+c_{1}=0 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Finally, the solution is 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(t)=\frac{Lm}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}}\sin mt+\frac{R}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}}\cos mt-\frac{R}{R^{2}+L^{2}m^{2}}e^{-Rt/L} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Question 2 (Higher-Order Differential Equations)
\the_end
