#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
 \usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Assignment 1 for Math 3423 - Numerical Methods 2)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (This is the first assignment for Math 3423.)
            /Keywords   (Numerical differentiation and integration.)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Assignment 1
\newline 
MATH 3423 - Numerical Methods 2
\newline 
Acadia University
\layout Author


\latex latex 

\backslash 
href{http://www.ondelette.com/acadia/}{Daniel Lemire}
\latex default 
, Ph.D.
 
\layout Date

Winter 2002
\newline 
Due February 1st 2002
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Requirements}}{Requirements}
\layout Standard

You can do this assignment in teams of two or alone.
 5% of the mark will be based on presentation.
 All required plots should be computer-generated.
 A title page is required.
 All computer code must be properly commented and should be computationally
 efficient.
 You may use the language you prefer (Matlab, C, Fortran, Java, C++...) as
 long as you document your work.
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Numerical Differentiation}}{Numerical Differentiation}
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Basic applications}}{Basic applications}
\layout Enumerate

For the following problems, approximate the specified derivative.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Using the forward-difference formula.
\layout Enumerate

Using the backward-difference formula.
\layout Enumerate

Using the central-difference formula.
\layout Enumerate

Using Richardson extrapolation to improve (once) your central-difference
 result.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Question 1.
 Approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( y'(1.0) \)
\end_inset 

 if 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=[0.8\, 0.9\, 1.0\, 1.1\, 1.2] \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( y=[0.992\, 0.999\, 1.000\, 1.001\, 1.008] \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Question 2.
 Approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( y'(1) \)
\end_inset 

 if 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=[-1\, 0\, 1\, 2\, 3] \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( y=[1/3\, 1\, 3\, 9\, 27] \)
\end_inset 

.
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

The altitude of a helicopter at three different instants is found to be
 
\begin_inset Formula \( h_{1}=445.98 \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t_{1}=0.20 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( h_{2}=471.85 \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t_{2}=0.30 \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( h_{3}=503.46 \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t_{3}=0.41 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Taylor expanding twice the altitude 
\begin_inset Formula \( h(t) \)
\end_inset 

 of the helicopter about 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=0.30 \)
\end_inset 

, find 
\begin_inset Formula \( dh/dt \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=0.30 \)
\end_inset 

 using all of the available data.
 (HINT: do not try to plug in a formula...
 work out the math...)
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Theory}}{Theory}
\layout Enumerate

Observe that the sum of all the coefficients of the functions values appearing
 in the numerator of all finite-difference derivatives seen in class is
 0.
 Give at least 4 examples to justify this claim.
 Prove that it must always be so.
\layout Enumerate

Give the order of accuracy (
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x),\, O((\Delta x)^{2}),\, ... \)
\end_inset 

) for the following formulas.
 Briefly justify your answer (do not guess!).
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'=\frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'=\frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i-1}}{2\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}''=\frac{f_{i+2}-2f_{i+1}+f_{i}}{(\Delta x)^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}''=\frac{f_{i+1}-2f_{i}+f_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'''=\frac{f_{i+3}-3f_{i+2}-3f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{\Delta x^{3}} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'=\frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{2\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Recall that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f-g\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }(S)}=\max \{|f(x)-g(x)|,x\in S\} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Give the formulas for two families of real-valued functions 
\begin_inset Formula \( f,g \)
\end_inset 

 with a parameter 
\begin_inset Formula \( a \)
\end_inset 

 (for example 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sin ax \)
\end_inset 

) over the real numbers such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f-g\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }} \)
\end_inset 

 can be made as small as we want (by a change of parameter) while 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f'-g'\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }}\geq 1 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Suppose now that you have a sampling of two functions 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i},g_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 for some 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

 values (
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{i} \)
\end_inset 

), use your example to show that while the values 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i},g_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 might be very close, and thus their numerical derivatives, their actual
 derivatives might be very different.
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Problem}}{Problem}
\layout Standard

You are working for NASA.
 The American government has spotted an UFO and you must process the collected
 data.
 Write a computer program to estimate the speed as a function of time of
 the object and its acceleration (one real number per time sample for both
 speed and acceleration).
 You must do this work for accuracy orders 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x),O((\Delta x)^{2}) \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( O((\Delta x)^{4}) \)
\end_inset 

.
 You must hand in the computer program you wrote, a brief explanation of
 the formulas you used and two plots for each order of accuracy: speed vs
 time and acceleration vs time.
\layout Standard

Data (in format 
\begin_inset Formula \( [x,y,z,t] \)
\end_inset 

) : [0.84, 1.71, 1.0], [4.0, 1.81, 5.38, 2.0], [9.0, 0.42, 17.08, 3.0], [16.0, - 3.02,
 50.59, 4.0], [25.0, - 4.79, 143.41, 5.0], [36.0, - 1.67, 397.42, 6.0], [49.0, 4.59,
 1089.63, 7.0], [64.0, 7.91, 2972.95, 8.0], [81.0, 3.70, 8094.08, 9.0], [100.0, - 5.44,
 22016.46, 10.0], [121.0, - 10.99, 59863.14, 11.0], [144.0, - 6.43, 162742.79, 12.0],
 [169.0, 5.46, 442400.39, 13.0], [196.0, 13.86, 1202590.28, 14.0], [225.0, 9.75, 3269002.37
, 15.0],[256.0, - 4.60, 8886094.52, 16.0].
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Numerical Integration}}{Numerical Integration}
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Basic Applications}}{Basic Applications}
\layout Enumerate

Use Gaussian quadrature with 
\begin_inset Formula \( n=3 \)
\end_inset 

 and exact arithmetic to approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{-1}^{1}x^{4}dx \)
\end_inset 

.
 Compare your result with the expected value of the integral and discuss
 the two.
\layout Enumerate

Evaluate the integral 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{0}^{2\pi }\cos ^{2}xdx \)
\end_inset 

 using the following methods with 6 function evaluations (give all of your
 computations):
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Trapezoidal rule.
\layout Enumerate

Simpson's rule (1/3)
\layout Enumerate

Gauss quadrature formula
\end_deeper 
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Theory}}{Theory}
\layout Enumerate

Show that the integral given by the trapezoidal rule is the average of the
 integrals given by the two rectangular rules.
\layout Enumerate

Use the definition of the Legendre polynomial 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}(x)=\frac{(-1)^{n}}{2^{n}n!}\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}] \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( n\geq 1 \)
\end_inset 

 to find a relationship between 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}'(x) \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n+1}(x) \)
\end_inset 

, and then show the equivalence of the following expressions for the coefficient
s for Gaussian quadrature: 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{i}=\frac{-2}{(n+1)P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right) P_{n+1}\left( x_{i}\right) } \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{i}=\frac{2\left( 1-x_{i}^{2}\right) }{(n+1)^{2}P_{n+1}^{2}\left( x_{i}\right) } \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
HINTS:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

The 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{i} \)
\end_inset 

's are the roots of 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n} \)
\end_inset 

 and thus 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}\left( x_{i}\right) =0 \)
\end_inset 

, however, 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 is not zero in general, nor is 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n+1}\left( x_{i}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

.
 (Why?)
\layout Enumerate

You might want to use Leibnitz' rule which says that
\begin_inset Formula \[
\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}uv=\sum _{k=0}^{n}\frac{n!}{(n-k)!k!}\frac{d^{k}}{dx^{k}}u\frac{d^{n-k}}{dx^{n-k}}u.\]

\end_inset 

You don't have to prove Leibnitz' rule, but you should be clever enough
 to know how to prove it if your life depended on it!
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Suppose that the quadrature rule 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}f(x)dx\approx \sum _{i=1}^{n}w_{i}f\left( x_{i}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 is exact for all constant functions.
 What does this imply about the weights 
\begin_inset Formula \( w_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 or the nodes 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{i} \)
\end_inset 

? 
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Problem}}{Problem}
\layout Standard

Assuming that 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 is twice differentiable, prove that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}f(x)dx=(b-a)f\left( \frac{b-a}{2}\right) +\frac{\left( b-a\right) ^{3}}{24}f''(\xi ) \)
\end_inset 

 for some 
\begin_inset Formula \( \xi \in [a,b] \)
\end_inset 

.
 The formula 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}f(x)dx\cong (b-a)f\left( \frac{b-a}{2}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 is called the Midpoint formula.
 Write a computer program to implement the Midpoint formula and use it to
 integrate 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sin x \)
\end_inset 

 between 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0 \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

 using as many function evaluations as you need to properly estimate the
 integral starting with 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2,4,8,16,32,64... \)
\end_inset 

 function evaluations.
 You must hand in the code of your computer program and a table with your
 results (function evaluations vs value).
 Plot your table.
 Briefly comment on your results (what is the apparent rate of convergence...what
 do you expect from the theory...).
 
\the_end
