#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
%%%%%
%%%%%
%%%%%
%% Welcome!
%% if you have any question about this
%% document, please get in touch with
%% Daniel Lemire at lemire@ondelette.com
%%
%% Of course, this file was generated
%% with LyX which means that the syntax
%% might be weird at times, but I've found
%% that LyX did an excellent job overall at
%% generating clean LaTeX syntax.
%% Why do I choose LyX? Because LyX
%% doesn't come with its own LaTeX engine.
%% LyX simply use whatever tex I have.
%% There is no "proprietary gizmos" going
%% on. Also, instead of waiting for support
%% from some folk in California, I can find
%% most of the answers I need on the web,
%% for free! Oh! And LyX is free too! 
%% Good old Open Source software!
%%
%% (Sorry for the propaganda!)
%% 
%% Thanks!
%% Enjoy!
%%
%% Sept. 8th 2001
%% Grand-Pré, NS
%%
%%%%%%%%%%
%
% Notice that this document requires quite
% a bit of macros... 
% Sorry about that!
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true,citecolor=blue]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Topics from Advanced Calculus)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (MidTerm.)
            /Keywords   ( vector calculus, Acadia)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}


%%
%% You might need this next line... I don't for
%% some reason... defined somewhere?
%%
%% \newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
%%
%% Document should begin NOW!
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Numerical Methods 2 (MATH 3423) - MidTerm
\layout Author

Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.
\layout Date

February 25th 2002
\layout Enumerate

[25 marks] Given the following 
\begin_inset Formula \( (x,y) \)
\end_inset 

 couples, find an 
\begin_inset Formula \( O\left( (\Delta x)^{2}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 estimation for the derivative at 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0 \)
\end_inset 

 using Taylor series: 
\begin_inset Formula \( (-1,2),(0,1),(3,0) \)
\end_inset 

.
 Show your work.
\newline 
Solution: This problem was part of assignment 1, the solution was given
 as a handout and it was also done in class.
 I even went as far as to mention it was a good test question! We 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Taylor expand twice about 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=0 \)
\end_inset 


\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2=f(-1)=1+f'(0)(-1)+f''(0)(-1)^{2}/2+O\left( (\Delta x)^{3}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 (backward) and 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0=f(3)=1+f'(0)(3)+f''(0)(3)^{2}/2+O\left( (\Delta x)^{3}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 (forward).
 Solving for 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'(0) \)
\end_inset 

, we get 
\begin_inset Formula \( 9(2)=9-1+(-9-3)f'(0)+O\left( (\Delta x)^{3}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 hence 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'(0)=\frac{18-9+1}{-12}+O\left( (\Delta x)^{2}\right) =\frac{-5}{6}+O\left( (\Delta x)^{2}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\layout Enumerate

[25 marks] Using the Gaussian Quadrature, how many nodes 
\begin_inset Formula \( (n=?) \)
\end_inset 

 do I need to integrate 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}x^{2}+x^{5}+x^{7}dx \)
\end_inset 

 exactly (except for unavoidable numerical errors)? How many nodes do I
 need if I use the composite Simpson's method? Which method is best?
\newline 
Solution: Gaussian Quadrature has accuracy 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2n-1 \)
\end_inset 

 and we have a polynomial of degree 7, we solve 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2n-1=7 \)
\end_inset 

 to get 
\begin_inset Formula \( n=4 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Simpson's rule (composed or not) has accuracy order 3 (cubic) and cannot
 be used to compute exactly polynomials of degree 7.
 In fact, the only practical way of doing so is to use Gaussian Quadrature
 since Newton-Cotes method are not very good at integrating very high degrees
 polynomials.
\layout Enumerate

[25 marks] You want to integrate 
\begin_inset Formula \[
f(x)=\left\{ \begin{array}{cc}
x^{4} & x>0\\
x^{2}+1 & x\leq 0
\end{array}\right. \]

\end_inset 

from 
\begin_inset Formula \( -1 \)
\end_inset 

 to 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Which type of method is best, composite Newton-Cotes or Gaussian Quadrature?
 Explain.
\newline 
Solution: Composite Newton-Cotes method is better because 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 is discontinuous.
 While Gaussian Quadrature assumes we have a smooth function, composite
 Newton-Cotes allows for some discontinuities.
 Just think of integrating a step function using the midpoint formula.
\layout Enumerate

[25 marks] Show that if 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 satisfies 
\begin_inset Formula \( f\left( \frac{x+y}{2}\right) =\frac{f(x)+f(x+y)}{2} \)
\end_inset 

 for any 
\begin_inset Formula \( x,y \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \max _{x}\{|f(x)-f(x+1)|\}=M<\infty  \)
\end_inset 

, then 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 must be continuous (a sketch of the proof is sufficient).
\newline 
Solution: 
\begin_inset Formula \( f\left( x+1/2\right) =\frac{f(x)+f(x+1)}{2} \)
\end_inset 

 hence 
\begin_inset Formula \( f\left( x+1/2\right) -f(x)=\frac{-f(x)+f(x+1)}{2} \)
\end_inset 

 or 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left| f\left( \frac{x+1}{2}\right) -f(x)\right| \leq \frac{M}{2} \)
\end_inset 

 repeating this, you get 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left| f\left( x+1/2^{n}\right) -f(x)\right| \leq M/2^{n} \)
\end_inset 

 which leads you to a proof that 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 is continuous.
\the_end
