#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
 \usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Assignment 1 for Math 3423 - Numerical Methods 2)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (This is the first assignment for Math 3423.)
            /Keywords   (Numerical differentiation and integration.)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Assignment 1 - Solutions
\newline 
MATH 3423 - Numerical Methods 2
\newline 
Acadia University
\layout Author


\latex latex 

\backslash 
href{http://www.ondelette.com/acadia/}{Daniel Lemire}
\latex default 
, Ph.D.
 
\layout Date

Winter 2002
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Requirements}}{Requirements}
\layout Standard

I expected well presented papers with computer generated graphics and title
 pages.
 All of you met my standards so you all receive 5/5 for presentation.
 If you want a real challenge, try LaTeX in the future (not required).
\layout Standard

A couple of students who will remain nameless did hand in an assignment
 without properly binding the sheets together.
 Since I actually read all of your work and go over it several times, this
 is very inconvenient.
 Please consider more robust binding.
\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Numerical Differentiation}}{Numerical Differentiation}
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Basic applications}}{Basic applications}
\layout Enumerate

[6 marks] For the following problems, approximate the specified derivative.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Using the forward-difference formula.
\layout Enumerate

Using the backward-difference formula.
\layout Enumerate

Using the central-difference formula.
\layout Enumerate

Using Richardson extrapolation to improve (once) your central-difference
 result.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Question 1.
 Approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( y'(1.0) \)
\end_inset 

 if 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=[0.8\, 0.9\, 1.0\, 1.1\, 1.2] \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( y=[0.992\, 0.999\, 1.000\, 1.001\, 1.008] \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 (a) 0.01 (b) 0.01 (c) 0.01 (d) several answers are possible, try 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{-f(-1.2)+4f(1.1)-3f(1)}{2(0.1)}=-0.02 \)
\end_inset 


\color default
.
\color blue

\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

Question 2.
 Approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( y'(1) \)
\end_inset 

 if 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=[-1\, 0\, 1\, 2\, 3] \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( y=[1/3\, 1\, 3\, 9\, 27] \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 (a) 6 (b) 2 (c) 4 (d) several answers are possible, try 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{-f(3)+4f(2)-3f(1)}{2(1)}=0 \)
\end_inset 

.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[5 marks] The altitude of a helicopter at three different instants is found
 to be 
\begin_inset Formula \( h_{1}=445.98 \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t_{1}=0.20 \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( h_{2}=471.85 \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t_{2}=0.30 \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( h_{3}=503.46 \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t_{3}=0.41 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Taylor expanding twice the altitude 
\begin_inset Formula \( h(t) \)
\end_inset 

 of the helicopter about 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=0.30 \)
\end_inset 

, find 
\begin_inset Formula \( dh/dt \)
\end_inset 

 at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=0.30 \)
\end_inset 

 using all of the available data.
 (HINT: do not try to plug in a formula...
 work out the math...)
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 The proper way to do this problem is to Taylor expand 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

forward
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 and then 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

backward
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 Firstly, 
\begin_inset Formula \[
h(t_{3})=h(t_{2})+h'(t_{2})(t_{3}-t_{2})+\frac{(t_{3}-t_{2})^{2}h''(t_{2})}{2}+error,\]

\end_inset 

 secondly 
\begin_inset Formula \[
h(t_{1})=h(t_{2})+h'(t_{2})(t_{1}-t_{2})+\frac{(t_{1}-t_{2})^{2}h''(t_{2})}{2}+error.\]

\end_inset 

 Plugging the numbers, these equations 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray*}
503.46-471.85=0.121h''(t_{2})+0.11h'(t_{2})+... &  & \\
445.98-471.85=0.01h''(t_{2})-0.1h'(t_{2})+... &  & 
\end{eqnarray*}

\end_inset 

Solving this set of equations in order to cancel out the 
\begin_inset Formula \( h''(t_{2}) \)
\end_inset 

 terms should give you 
\begin_inset Formula \( h'(t_{2})\cong 272.35 \)
\end_inset 


\color default
.

\color blue
 You have to stop at this point and read the solution over.
 Make sure you understand it since this is pretty deep stuff.
 This is a perfect prototype for a test question!
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Theory}}{Theory}
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] Observe that the sum of all the coefficients of the functions
 values appearing in the numerator of all finite-difference derivatives
 seen in class is 0.
 Give at least 4 examples to justify this claim.
 Prove that it must always be so.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Examples: 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 

,
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{f_{i}-f_{i-1}}{\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i-1}}{2\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{f_{i+1}-2f_{i}+f_{i-1}}{(\Delta x)^{2}} \)
\end_inset 

.
 To prove the result, choose 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=1 \)
\end_inset 

, then 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{k}=1 \)
\end_inset 

 for all 
\begin_inset Formula \( k's \)
\end_inset 

.
 Therefore, given a formula such as 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{\sum _{i}w_{i}f_{i}}{(\Delta x)^{n}}\cong f^{(n)} \)
\end_inset 

 for some derivative, we have that 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0=f^{(n)}=\frac{\sum _{i}w_{i}}{(\Delta x)^{n}} \)
\end_inset 

 hence 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sum _{i}w_{i}=0 \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

[6 marks] Give the order of accuracy (
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x),\, O((\Delta x)^{2}),\, ... \)
\end_inset 

) for the following formulas.
 Briefly justify your answer (do not guess!).
\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 In this question, 3 of the examples were, on purpose, flawed.
 I was expecting you to object when you were given an incorrect formula!
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'=\frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Taylor series expansion leads to 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x) \)
\end_inset 

 (forward difference).
 See examples in class.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'=\frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i-1}}{2\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Taylor series expansion leads to 
\begin_inset Formula \( O((\Delta x)^{2}) \)
\end_inset 

 (centered difference).
 See examples in class.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}''=\frac{f_{i+2}-2f_{i+1}+f_{i}}{(\Delta x)^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Taylor series expansion leads to 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x) \)
\end_inset 

 (forward difference).
 See examples in class.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}''=\frac{f_{i+1}-2f_{i}+f_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 The new trick here is that instead of having
\color default
 
\begin_inset Formula \( (\Delta x)^{2} \)
\end_inset 


\color blue
 in the numerator, we have 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta x^{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Does that matter? Suppose that 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=k\Delta x \)
\end_inset 

, then 
\begin_inset Formula \( x^{2}=k^{2}(\Delta x)^{2} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta x^{2}=(k+1)^{2}(\Delta x)^{2}-k^{2}(\Delta x)^{2}=(2k+1)(\Delta x)^{2} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Therefore 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Delta x^{2} \)
\end_inset 

 is incorrect here.
 However, I took off few marks if you gave the answer 
\begin_inset Formula \( O((\Delta x)^{2}) \)
\end_inset 

 (centered difference) by assuming that the formula was 
\color default

\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}''=\frac{f_{i+1}-2f_{i}+f_{i-1}}{(\Delta x)^{2}} \)
\end_inset 


\color blue
.
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'''=\frac{f_{i+3}-3f_{i+2}-3f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{\Delta x^{3}} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 The real answer was to say that this is not a proper formula for several
 reasons (trick question).
 However, if you assumed that the formula was 
\color default

\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'''=\frac{f_{i+3}-3f_{i+2}+3f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{(\Delta x)^{3}} \)
\end_inset 


\color blue
 and said that since this is a centered difference formula, it must be 
\begin_inset Formula \( O((\Delta x)^{2}) \)
\end_inset 

, then you are also correct.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i}'=\frac{f_{i+1}-f_{i}}{2\Delta x} \)
\end_inset 


\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 The real answer was to say that this is not a proper formula(trick question).
 I wouldn't accept 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x) \)
\end_inset 

 (forward difference) as an answer here.
 This formula is clearly flawed (compare with part a).
 The only valid answer was to say that the formula was incorrect.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[5 marks] Recall that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f-g\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }(S)}=\max \{|f(x)-g(x)|,x\in S\} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Give the formulas for two families of real-valued functions 
\begin_inset Formula \( f,g \)
\end_inset 

 with a parameter 
\begin_inset Formula \( a \)
\end_inset 

 (for example 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sin ax \)
\end_inset 

) over the real numbers such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f-g\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }} \)
\end_inset 

 can be made as small as we want (by a change of parameter) while 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f'-g'\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }}\geq 1 \)
\end_inset 

.
 Suppose now that you have a sampling of two functions 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i},g_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 for some 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

 values (
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{i} \)
\end_inset 

), use your example to show that while the values 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{i},g_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 might be very close, and thus their numerical derivatives, their actual
 derivatives might be very different.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Take 
\begin_inset Formula \( f=0 \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( g=\frac{\sin ax}{a} \)
\end_inset 

 defined over 
\begin_inset Formula \( S=[0,2\pi ] \)
\end_inset 

 then 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f-g\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }(S)}=1/a\rightarrow 0 \)
\end_inset 

 as 
\begin_inset Formula \( a\rightarrow \infty  \)
\end_inset 

.
 On the other hand, 
\begin_inset Formula \( g'=\cos ax \)
\end_inset 

 and hence 
\color default

\begin_inset Formula \( \left\Vert f'-g'\right\Vert _{L^{\infty }}=1 \)
\end_inset 


\color blue
.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Problem}}{Problem}
\layout Standard

You are working for NASA.
 The American government has spotted an UFO and you must process the collected
 data.
 Write a computer program to estimate the speed as a function of time of
 the object and its acceleration (one real number per time sample for both
 speed and acceleration).
 You must do this work for accuracy orders 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(\Delta x),O((\Delta x)^{2}) \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( O((\Delta x)^{4}) \)
\end_inset 

.
 You must hand in the computer program you wrote, a brief explanation of
 the formulas you used and two plots for each order of accuracy: speed vs
 time and acceleration vs time.
\layout Standard

Data (in format 
\begin_inset Formula \( [x,y,z,t] \)
\end_inset 

) : [0.84, 1.71, 1.0], [4.0, 1.81, 5.38, 2.0], [9.0, 0.42, 17.08, 3.0], [16.0, - 3.02,
 50.59, 4.0], [25.0, - 4.79, 143.41, 5.0], [36.0, - 1.67, 397.42, 6.0], [49.0, 4.59,
 1089.63, 7.0], [64.0, 7.91, 2972.95, 8.0], [81.0, 3.70, 8094.08, 9.0], [100.0, - 5.44,
 22016.46, 10.0], [121.0, - 10.99, 59863.14, 11.0], [144.0, - 6.43, 162742.79, 12.0],
 [169.0, 5.46, 442400.39, 13.0], [196.0, 13.86, 1202590.28, 14.0], [225.0, 9.75, 3269002.37
, 15.0],[256.0, - 4.60, 8886094.52, 16.0].
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 
\color default
[20 marks] 
\color blue
The plots should show a roughly exponential increase in speed and acceleration.
 You were expected to use formulas such as 
\begin_inset Formula \[
v(t)=\frac{\left\Vert \underline{X}(t+\Delta t)-\underline{X}(t)\right\Vert }{\Delta t}\]

\end_inset 

and
\begin_inset Formula \[
a(t)=\frac{\left\Vert \underline{X}(t+\Delta t)-2\underline{X}(t)+\underline{X}(t-\Delta t)\right\Vert }{(\Delta t)^{2}}.\]

\end_inset 

 And various, straight-forward generalizations.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Section


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblackblue}{Numerical Integration}}{Numerical Integration}
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Basic Applications}}{Basic Applications}
\layout Enumerate

[4 marks] Use Gaussian quadrature with 
\begin_inset Formula \( n=3 \)
\end_inset 

 and exact arithmetic to approximate 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{-1}^{1}x^{4}dx \)
\end_inset 

.
 Compare your result with the expected value of the integral and discuss
 the two.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 The exact arithmetic answer is 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2/5 \)
\end_inset 

.
 For 
\color default

\begin_inset Formula \( n=3 \)
\end_inset 


\color blue
, you should get 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2/5 \)
\end_inset 

 from the Gaussian quadrature formula since it is exact for polynomials
 of degree 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2n-1=2(3)-1=5 \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( x^{4} \)
\end_inset 

 is a polynomial of degree 
\begin_inset Formula \( 4<5 \)
\end_inset 

.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Evaluate the integral 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{0}^{2\pi }\cos ^{2}xdx \)
\end_inset 

 using the following methods with 6 function evaluations (give all of your
 computations):
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Trapezoidal rule.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Choosing the composite trapezoidal rule with nodes at 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=0,\frac{2\pi }{5},\frac{4\pi }{5},\frac{6\pi }{5},\frac{8\pi }{5},2\pi  \)
\end_inset 

, you get 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

.
 Please note that in this case, the number of function evaluation is exactly
 the same as the number of nodes.
 No marks were taken off if you only took 5 nodes because of the possible
 confusion in part b.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

Simpson's rule (1/3)
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 For this case, you had to recognize that it was impossible to use exactly
 6 function evaluations.
 You could have chosen to use 7 function evaluations, but using 5 function
 evaluations was a fine alternative.
 You had to choose the nodes 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=0,\frac{\pi }{2},\pi ,\frac{3\pi }{2},2\pi  \)
\end_inset 

 and the answer is then 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{4\pi }{6} \)
\end_inset 

.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

Gauss quadrature formula
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Given the Matlab program I provided, on through any other mean, you had
 to find the weights and the nodes for the 
\begin_inset Formula \( n=6 \)
\end_inset 

 gaussian quadrature.
 You had to get values that look (roughly) like the following table.
\newline 

\latex latex 

\backslash 
hspace{5cm}
\latex default 

\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="2" rows="4" columns="2">
<features rotate="false" islongtable="false" endhead="0" endfirsthead="0" endfoot="0" endlastfoot="0">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="false" width="" special="">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="" special="">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \( w \)
\end_inset 

eights
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

nodes
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0.17
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \( \pm 0.93 \)
\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0.36
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \( \pm 0.66 \)
\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \( 0.47 \)
\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \( \pm 0.24 \)
\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\newline 
From that point, it was easy to get 
\begin_inset Formula \( 3.1 \)
\end_inset 

 as an approximation.
 Of course, you had to do a change of variables to get the integral to be
 from -1 to 1 (
\begin_inset Formula \( t=\frac{x-\pi }{\pi } \)
\end_inset 

) and integrate 
\begin_inset Formula \[
\frac{1}{\pi }\int _{-1}^{1}\cos ^{2}\left( \pi t+\pi \right) dt\]

\end_inset 

.
 It is interesting to point out that in this case, the exact answer is 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

 and therefore the most accurate scheme is trapezoidal rule followed by
 the gaussian quadrature.
 Does that bother you that Simpson gives a worse result? Can you explain
 why? (HINT: I said in class that we don't necessarily want to always go
 for high order schemes because...) 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Theory}}{Theory}
\layout Enumerate

[5 marks] Show that the integral given by the trapezoidal rule is the average
 of the integrals given by the two rectangular rules.
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Integrating 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 over 
\begin_inset Formula \( [a,b] \)
\end_inset 

, the left-hand-side rectangular rule gives 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(a)(b-a) \)
\end_inset 

 whereas the right-hand-side rule gives 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(b)(b-a) \)
\end_inset 

, the average of the two is 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{f(a)+f(b)}{2}(b-a) \)
\end_inset 

 which is the trapezoidal rule.
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate

[10 marks] Use the definition of the Legendre polynomial 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}(x)=\frac{(-1)^{n}}{2^{n}n!}\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}] \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( n\geq 1 \)
\end_inset 

 to find a relationship between 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}'(x) \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n+1}(x) \)
\end_inset 

, and then show the equivalence of the following expressions for the coefficient
s for Gaussian quadrature: 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{i}=\frac{-2}{(n+1)P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right) P_{n+1}\left( x_{i}\right) } \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{i}=\frac{2\left( 1-x_{i}^{2}\right) }{(n+1)^{2}P_{n+1}^{2}\left( x_{i}\right) } \)
\end_inset 

.
\newline 
HINTS:
\newline 
(a) The 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{i} \)
\end_inset 

's are the roots of 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n} \)
\end_inset 

 and thus 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}\left( x_{i}\right) =0 \)
\end_inset 

, however, 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 is not zero in general, nor is 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n+1}\left( x_{i}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

.
 (Why?)
\newline 
(b) You might want to use Leibnitz' rule which says that
\begin_inset Formula \[
\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}uv=\sum _{k=0}^{n}\frac{n!}{(n-k)!k!}\frac{d^{k}}{dx^{k}}u\frac{d^{n-k}}{dx^{n-k}}u.\]

\end_inset 

You don't have to prove Leibnitz' rule, but you should be clever enough
 to know how to prove it if your life depended on it!
\series bold 

\newline 

\color blue
 Solution:
\series default 
 In order to show that
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate


\color blue

\begin_inset Formula \[
c_{i}=\frac{-2}{(n+1)P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right) P_{n+1}\left( x_{i}\right) }\]

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \[
c_{i}=\frac{2\left( 1-x_{i}^{2}\right) }{(n+1)^{2}P_{n+1}^{2}\left( x_{i}\right) }\]

\end_inset 

 are equivalent formulas, you need to show that 
\begin_inset Formula \[
\frac{-2}{(n+1)P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right) P_{n+1}\left( x_{i}\right) }=\frac{2\left( 1-x_{i}^{2}\right) }{(n+1)^{2}P_{n+1}^{2}\left( x_{i}\right) }\]

\end_inset 

or else,
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\label{havetoprove}
-(n+1)P_{n+1}^{}\left( x_{i}\right) =\left( 1-x_{i}^{2}\right) P_{n}'\left( x_{i}\right) .
\end{equation}

\end_inset 

Using Rodrigue's formula 
\begin_inset Formula \[
P_{n}(x)=\frac{(-1)^{n}}{2^{n}n!}\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}],\]

\end_inset 

equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{havetoprove}

\end_inset 

 becomes
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
\label{newhavetoprove}
\frac{d^{n+1}}{dx^{n+1}}[(1-x^{2}_{i})^{n+1}]=2\left( 1-x_{i}^{2}\right) \frac{d^{n+1}}{dx^{n+1}}[(1-x^{2}_{i})^{n}]
\end{equation}

\end_inset 

subject to 
\begin_inset Formula \[
\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}[(1-x_{i}^{2})^{n}]=0.\]

\end_inset 

Let 
\begin_inset Formula \( b(x)=x^{2}-1 \)
\end_inset 

, starting with the simple formula
\begin_inset Formula \[
\left( x^{2}-1\right) \frac{d}{dx}\left( x^{2}-1\right) ^{n}-2nx\left( x^{2}-1\right) ^{n}=0,\]

\end_inset 

or 
\begin_inset Formula \[
b\frac{d}{dx}b^{n}-2nxb^{n}=0\]

\end_inset 

we differentiate 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 times using Leibnitz' rule (the computation only relies on Leibnitz' rule
 and some elementary algebra!)
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray*}
0 & = & \frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}\left( b\frac{d}{dx}b^{n}-2nxb^{n}\right) \\
 & = & n\left( n-1\right) \frac{d^{n-1}}{dx^{n-1}}b^{n}+2nx\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}b^{n}+b\frac{d^{n+1}}{dx^{n+1}}b^{n}\\
 &  & -2n^{2}\frac{d^{n-1}}{dx^{n-1}}b^{n}-2nx\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}b^{n}\\
 & =- & \left( 1-x^{2}\right) \frac{d^{n+1}b^{n}}{dx^{n+1}}-n(n+1)\frac{d^{n-1}b^{n}}{dx^{n-1}}.
\end{eqnarray*}

\end_inset 

Hence, we have
\begin_inset Formula \[
\left( 1-x^{2}\right) \frac{d^{n+1}}{dx^{n+1}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}]=-n(n+1)\frac{d^{n-1}}{dx^{n-1}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}]\]

\end_inset 

Using Leibnitz' rule again, we differentiate 
\begin_inset Formula \( (1-x^{2}_{})^{n+1} \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( n+1 \)
\end_inset 

 times
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray*}
\frac{d^{n+1}}{dx^{n+1}}[(1-x^{2}_{})^{n+1}] & = & (1-x^{2})\frac{d^{n+1}}{dx^{n+1}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}]\\
 &  & -2(n+1)x\frac{d^{n}}{dx^{n}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}]-(n+1)(n)\frac{d^{n-1}}{dx^{n-1}}[(1-x^{2})^{n}].\\
 &  & 
\end{eqnarray*}

\end_inset 

The rest is left as an exercice.
 (HINT: combine the last two equations and evaluate at a root of 
\begin_inset Formula \( P_{n} \)
\end_inset 

).
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[5 marks] Suppose that the quadrature rule 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}f(x)dx\approx \sum _{i=1}^{n}w_{i}f\left( x_{i}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 is exact for all constant functions.
 What does this imply about the weights 
\begin_inset Formula \( w_{i} \)
\end_inset 

 or the nodes 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{i} \)
\end_inset 

? 
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Choose 
\begin_inset Formula \( f=1 \)
\end_inset 

, then 
\color default

\begin_inset Formula \( b-a=\int _{a}^{b}dx\approx \sum _{i=1}^{n}w_{i} \)
\end_inset 

.

\color blue
 
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection


\latex latex 

\backslash 
texorpdfstring{
\backslash 
textcolor{webblue}{Problem}}{Problem}
\layout Standard

[15 marks] Assuming that 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 is twice differentiable, prove that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}f(x)dx=(b-a)f\left( \frac{b+a}{2}\right) +\frac{\left( b-a\right) ^{3}}{24}f''(\xi ) \)
\end_inset 

 for some 
\begin_inset Formula \( \xi \in [a,b] \)
\end_inset 

.
 The formula 
\begin_inset Formula \( \int _{a}^{b}f(x)dx\cong (b-a)f\left( \frac{b+a}{2}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 is called the Midpoint formula.
 Write a computer program to implement the Midpoint formula and use it to
 integrate 
\begin_inset Formula \( \sin x \)
\end_inset 

 between 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0 \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi  \)
\end_inset 

 using as many function evaluations as you need to properly estimate the
 integral starting with 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2,4,8,16,32,64... \)
\end_inset 

 function evaluations.
 You must hand in the code of your computer program and a table with your
 results (function evaluations vs value).
 Plot your table.
 Briefly comment on your results (what is the apparent rate of convergence...what
 do you expect from the theory...).
 
\newline 

\series bold 
\color blue
Solution:
\series default 
 Getting over the minor typo in the original question, the trick is to Taylor
 expand 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 about 
\begin_inset Formula \( \frac{b+a}{2} \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \[
f(x)=f\left( \frac{a+b}{2}\right) +\left( x-\frac{a+b}{2}\right) f'\left( \frac{a+b}{2}\right) +\frac{\left( x-\frac{a+b}{2}\right) ^{2}}{2}f''(\xi )\]

\end_inset 

and then you integrate.
 Clearly, the linear term goes to zero and you get the desired formula.
 The plot should show that the integral converges to 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2 \)
\end_inset 

 very quickly (consistent with 
\begin_inset Formula \( (\Delta x)^{3} \)
\end_inset 

 convergence!)
\begin_inset Formula \( \clubsuit  \)
\end_inset 


\the_end
