#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
%%%%%
%%%%%
%%%%%
%% Welcome!
%% if you have any question about this
%% document, please get in touch with
%% Daniel Lemire at lemire@ondelette.com
%%
%% Of course, this file was generated
%% with LyX which means that the syntax
%% might be weird at times, but I've found
%% that LyX did an excellent job overall at
%% generating clean LaTeX syntax.
%% Why do I choose LyX? Because LyX
%% doesn't come with its own LaTeX engine.
%% LyX simply use whatever tex I have.
%% There is no "proprietary gizmos" going
%% on. Also, instead of waiting for support
%% from some folk in California, I can find
%% most of the answers I need on the web,
%% for free! Oh! And LyX is free too! 
%% Good old Open Source software!
%%
%% (Sorry for the propaganda!)
%% 
%% Thanks!
%% Enjoy!
%%
%% Sept. 8th 2001
%% Grand-Pré, NS
%%
%%%%%%%%%%
%
% Notice that this document requires quite
% a bit of macros... 
% Sorry about that!
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{color}
 
 \definecolor{veryblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.1}
 \usepackage[pdftex,urlcolor=webblackblue,colorlinks=true,citecolor=blue]{hyperref}
 \pdfinfo{
            /Title      (Topics from Advanced Calculus)
            /Author     (Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.)
            /Subject    (MidTerm.)
            /Keywords   ( vector calculus, Acadia)
          }


\topmargin  = 0pt
\headheight = 0pt
\headsep    = 0pt

\voffset    = 0in
\hoffset    = 0in
\textheight = 230mm
\textwidth  = 164mm

\evensidemargin = 0pt
\oddsidemargin  = 0pt

\pagestyle{empty}
\usepackage{float}

%% Background of blue palette
 \definecolor{webblackblue}{rgb}{0.0,0.0,0.2}
 \definecolor{webblue}{rgb}{0.0, 0.0, 0.6}

%% Background of red palette
 \definecolor{webblackred}{rgb}{0.2,0.0,0.0}
 \definecolor{webred}{rgb}{0.6,0.0,0.0}

%% Background of green palette
 \definecolor{webblackgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.2,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webgreen}{rgb}{0.0,0.6,0.0} 

%% Background of magenta palette
 \definecolor{webblackmagenta}{rgb}{0.14,0.0,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webmagenta}{rgb}{0.42,0.0,0.42} 

%% Background of cyan palette
 \definecolor{webblackcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.14,0.14}                                   
 \definecolor{webcyan}{rgb}{0.0,0.42,0.42} 

%% Background of yellow pallete
 \definecolor{webblackyellow}{rgb}{0.14,0.14,0.0}                                   
 \definecolor{webyellow}{rgb}{0.85,0.85,0.0} 

 \definecolor{webdarkgray}{rgb}{0.2,0.2,0.2}

 \definecolor{webgray}{rgb}{0.75,0.75,0.75}
 \definecolor{weborange}{rgb}{1.0, 0.6, 0.0}

\renewcommand\labelenumi{\textcolor{webdarkgray}{\arabic{enumi}.}}
\newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
\usepackage{dsfont}


%%
%% You might need this next line... I don't for
%% some reason... defined somewhere?
%%
%% \newcommand{\setenumi}[1]{#1.\setcounter{enumi}{#1}}
%%
%% Document should begin NOW!
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Numerical Methods 2 (MATH 3423) - Final
\newline 
Acadia University
\newline 
Sprint 2002
\layout Author

Daniel Lemire, Ph.D.
\layout Date

Take home exam,
\layout Date

Due April 23rd 2002 - 4pm (Math & Stat.
 Secretary)
\layout Standard

Name: ___________________________________
\layout Standard

Student Number: ___________________________
\layout Standard

The exam is due on April 23rd 2002 at the Mathematics and Statistics secretary
 before 4pm (Huggins Science Hall, Room 130).
 While you can use all available documentation to write this exam including
 textbooks, web sites and lecture notes, you are to write this exam on your
 own.
 Specifically, you are not allowed to discuss this exam with other students
 or professors.
 While you can use a calculator or a computer, they are not required.
 The exam is designed to require about 3 hours of your time and contains
 6 questions.
 You must show your work.
\layout Enumerate

[15 marks] (Numerical Derivative) An elevator is moving with a variable
 velocity 
\begin_inset Formula \( v \)
\end_inset 

.
 Estimate the velocity at time 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=0 \)
\end_inset 

 ig the following data is available (give one velocity per case) using Taylor
 series expansions.
 
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

The elevator is at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=10 \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 
 
\latex default 
m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=-1 \)
\end_inset 

 s and at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=15 \)
\end_inset 

 m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=1 \)
\end_inset 

 s.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{8cm}
\layout Enumerate

The elevator is at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=10 \)
\end_inset 

 m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=-1 \)
\end_inset 

 s and at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=15 \)
\end_inset 

 m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=2 \)
\end_inset 

 s.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{8cm}
\layout Enumerate

The elevator is at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=10 \)
\end_inset 

 m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=-1 \)
\end_inset 

 s, at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=12 \)
\end_inset 

 m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=-0.1 \)
\end_inset 

, and at height 
\begin_inset Formula \( p=15 \)
\end_inset 

 m at 
\begin_inset Formula \( t=2 \)
\end_inset 

 s.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{8cm}
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

[15 marks] (Numerical Integration) Suppose we want to compute integrals
 like 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(f)=\int _{0}^{1}f(x)e^{x}dx \)
\end_inset 

 numerically using an approach similar to Gaussian Quadrature.
 Solve for 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{1} \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{1} \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{2} \)
\end_inset 

, and 
\begin_inset Formula \( x_{2} \)
\end_inset 

 in the quadrature formula 
\begin_inset Formula \( I(f)=\int _{0}^{1}f(x)e^{x}dx=c_{1}f\left( x_{1}\right) +c_{2}f\left( x_{2}\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 assuming that the quadrature formula must be exact for polynomials of order
 
\begin_inset Formula \( 4 \)
\end_inset 

 (example 
\begin_inset Formula \( f(x)=x^{4} \)
\end_inset 

).
 
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{8cm}
\layout Enumerate

[15 marks] (Interpolation) Using a pyramidal approach and showing all of
 your work, find the Newton polynomial interpolating the points 
\begin_inset Formula \(  \)
\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{8cm}
\layout Enumerate

[15 marks] Show that if 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 satisfies 
\begin_inset Formula \( f\left( \frac{x+y}{2}\right) =\frac{f(x)+f(x+y)}{2} \)
\end_inset 

 for any 
\begin_inset Formula \( x,y \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \max _{x}\{|f(x)-f(x+1)|\}=M<\infty  \)
\end_inset 

, then 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 must be continuous (a sketch of the proof is sufficient).
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{8cm}
\layout Enumerate

[20 marks] 
\layout Enumerate

[20 marks] 
\the_end
