#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass amsart
\begin_preamble
% \newcommand{\R}{{\sf R\hspace*{-0.9ex}\rule{0.15ex}% {1.3ex}\hspace*{0.9ex}}} \newcommand{\N}{{\sf N\hspace*{-1.0ex}\rule{0.15ex}% {1.1ex}\hspace*{1.0ex}}} \newcommand{\Q}{{\sf Q\hspace*{-1ex}\rule{0.15ex}% {1.3ex}\hspace*{1.1ex}}} \newcommand{\C}{{\sf C\hspace*{-0.9ex}\rule{0.15ex}% {1.3ex}\hspace*{0.9ex}}}
\usepackage{dsfont}
\end_preamble
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Nonlinear Functional Interpolation
\layout Author

Daniel Lemire
\layout Abstract

We give sufficient and necessary conditions on the functional for the nonlinear
 functional refinement subdivision schemes introduced by Donoho and Yu.
 
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

Subdivision schemes are used to interpolate scalar[réference] and vector
 data including derivatives [référence].
 In many instances however, such as image processing, the data we wish to
 interpolate refers to a region and not to a specific point.
 In an attempt to recouncile(spelling), subdivision schemes and practical
 applications, Donoho introduced average-interpolation.
 It can be shown that average-interpolation interpolants are in fact the
 derivatives of corresponding Deslauriers-Dubuc interpolants[référence]
 and exactly match some Cohen-Daubechies-Feauveau dual scaling functions[référen
ce].
 
\layout Standard

However, in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{DoYu1,DoYu2}

\end_inset 

, Donoho and Yu presented a median subdivision scheme while noting that
 it belonged to a larger class called functional interpolation.
 In particular, functional interpolation doesn't have to be linear which
 brings new mathematical challenges.
 
\layout Subsection

Average-Interpolation
\layout Subsection

Median-Interpolation
\layout Section

Lagrange Functional Interpolation over 
\begin_inset Formula \( \mathds {R} \)
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Let 
\begin_inset Formula \( I_{j,k} \)
\end_inset 

 be the semi-open 
\begin_inset Formula \( b \)
\end_inset 

-adic intervals 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left[ b^{-j}k,b^{-j}(k+1)\right)  \)
\end_inset 

.
 Observe that for any 
\begin_inset Formula \( j \)
\end_inset 

, we 
\begin_inset Formula \( \bigcup _{k=-\infty }^{\infty }I_{j,k}=\mathds {R} \)
\end_inset 

 and the size of the sets 
\begin_inset Formula \( I_{j,k} \)
\end_inset 

 tends to zero as 
\begin_inset Formula \( j\rightarrow \infty  \)
\end_inset 

.
 Let 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lambda _{I_{k,l}}\left( f\right)  \)
\end_inset 

 be a functional of 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 as a function over 
\begin_inset Formula \( I_{k,l} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Given a set of data 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\{ \lambda _{0,k}\right\} _{k\in \mathds {R}} \)
\end_inset 

 , we want to find a smooth function 
\begin_inset Formula \( f \)
\end_inset 

 such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lambda _{I_{0,k}}(f)=\lambda _{0,k} \)
\end_inset 

.
 In order to solve this problem, Donoho and Yu defined functional interpolation
 of order 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2L \)
\end_inset 

 as the following two-step scheme.
\layout Enumerate

(Interpolation) From the set 
\begin_inset Formula \( \left\{ \lambda _{j,k+h}\right\} _{h\in -L,...,L} \)
\end_inset 

 find the polynomial 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi _{j,k} \)
\end_inset 

 of order 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2D+1 \)
\end_inset 

 such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lambda _{I_{j,k+h}}(\pi _{j,k})=\lambda _{j,k+h} \)
\end_inset 

 for 
\begin_inset Formula \( h=-L,...,L \)
\end_inset 

.
 
\layout Enumerate

(Imputation) Using the polynomial computed at the previous step, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \pi _{j,k} \)
\end_inset 

, compute 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lambda _{j+1,bk},\lambda _{j+1,bk+1},...,\lambda _{j+1,bk+b-1} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

It should be noted that a more general scheme could replace polynomials
 with another set of functions.
 Also, it is certainly not possible to do step 
\begin_inset Formula \( 1 \)
\end_inset 

 for any functional and so we have to assume that it is possible.
\layout Standard

We can repeat the process as often as we want.
 At each step, define a function 
\begin_inset Formula \[
f_{j}=\sum _{k=-\infty }^{\infty }\lambda _{j,k}\pi _{j,k}1_{I_{j,k}}.\]

\end_inset 

Clearly, if at any point 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{j} \)
\end_inset 

 is a polynomial of order 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2L \)
\end_inset 

, then any 
\begin_inset Formula \( k \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{k>j}=f_{j} \)
\end_inset 

 .
\layout Section

Generalized Average Interpolation
\layout Standard

One way to generalized average interpolation is to replace the average of
 the function by the average of 
\begin_inset Formula \( Pf \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( P \)
\end_inset 

 is some operator.
 Hence, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \lambda _{I} \)
\end_inset 

 becomes
\begin_inset Formula \[
\lambda _{I}(f)=\int _{I}P(f).\]

\end_inset 

Specific examples include 
\begin_inset Formula \( P(f)=f+\frac{df}{dx} \)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Proposition

If 
\begin_inset Formula \( P \)
\end_inset 

 is a linear operator such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( P(x^{n})=x^{p}+.... \)
\end_inset 

 then the resulting interpolation scheme is an 
\begin_inset Formula \( p-N \)
\end_inset 

 average interpolation scheme.
\layout Standard

More interestingly...
\layout Proposition

If 
\begin_inset Formula \( P \)
\end_inset 

 is an operator such that 
\begin_inset Formula \( P(f)(x)\geq 0 \)
\end_inset 

 for all 
\begin_inset Formula \( x \)
\end_inset 

, then the scheme doesn't converge.
\layout Standard

What happens when we allow the regions to overlap or to be irregular???
\layout Standard

Multifunctional interpolation??? Ah! Ah! That's an interesting beast!!!
\layout Standard

Pf bounded means?
\layout Standard

Pf lower bounded means?
\layout Standard

functional stationary means scheme is stationary?
\layout Section

Functional Interpolation over an interval
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem [DoYu1]{DoYu1}

D.L.
 Donoho and T.P.Y.
 Yu, Deslauriers-Dubuc: Ten Years After, 1996.
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem [DoYu2]{DoYu2}

D.L.
 Donoho and T.P.
 Yu, Nonlinear 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Wavelet Transforms
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 based on median-interpolation, 1997.
\the_end
